The Philippines in the 21st century is a country still trying to find its identity. One need only look at the contrast between the prosperous business districts of Manila, and the squalid slums that stand sometimes just a few blocks away to see the difference between the competing visions and versions of our country. In the south, a decades-long insurgency has created a confusing state of affairs between a vacillating central government, powerful local warlords, and ever evolving and changing separatists.
	The question was asked more than a hundred years ago. A hundred years hence, will the Philippines be free? Today, the answer can be as complex as the man who asked the question. Is a land with a yawning gap between rich and poor really free? Is a country that has to tolerate, and even encourage, the emigration of its educated professionals to foreign lands deserving of the term independent? 
	In his untitled last poem, Jose Rizal bade farewell to “el Perle del Mar de Oriente, nuestro perdido Eden .” Of course, he was talking about the Philippines; one which has lived under Spanish domination for three centuries. The Eden of Rizal’s “Mi Ultimo Adios” perhaps summarized one of Rizal’s greatest and most enduring legacies, his vision for the Filipino people. For his contemporaries, it would ignite hope and, eventually, a revolution. But now, more than a century after, it seems we have yet to find this lost Eden. 
	. The persistence of Rizal today is due to many things: his writings, his role in Philippine history, the controversies that surround him, the legally enforced teaching of his life and works in Philippine schools. However, those alone cannot explain the pervasiveness of Rizal in the Filipino consciousness. Novels often go unread and misunderstood. Revolutions come and go; succeed or fail. It is the ideal set by Rizal that captures our imaginations up until today, a free country with an enlightened and educated populace taking its rightful place among the nations. 
	Rizal would do many things in the course of his short life. But perhaps the best place to start in understanding his vision is his own picture of Philippine society in the closing years of the 19th century. Here, Rizal the novelist and, in some ways, the journalist, would fire the opening shots of the nationalist awakening. 
	 The Philippines of Rizal’s time was the Tabo, the round boat of the opening chapters of the El Filibusterismo. It symbolized much of what was wrong with Spanish colonial regime. The engine not could steer without the tikin much as the colonial government could not move without the Church. The deck separated the two primary classes of the colonial period: those with Spanish blood and their select few collaborators; and those without. The contrast between the boat’s whitewashed exterior, and its dirty interior might as well have been applied to the stark differences between the idealized picture of a loyal colony, and the harsh realities of the mismanaged and exploited country. 
	The Philippines was also the town of San Diego, the setting of the Noli Me Tangere, where hard work, good intentions, a good education, and even connections to the governor-general did not protect Ibarra from the caprices of the pious aristocracy of the religious orders. The town contained many of the ills that Rizal denounced in his time: the expensive and frivolous celebration of feasts, the licentiousness and hypocrisy of the clergy and the society they dominated, the degeneration of Filipino society through drug use and gambling, and a people so convinced by their own inferiority. 

	This was the reality that the Noli and the Fili attacked. Rizal as a novelist created a realistic picture of the Philippines of his own time. As a journalist, he reported on what he saw and experienced about Spanish colonial rule. It was the present by which Rizal would contrast and construct his vision for the future. 
	It was perhaps Rizal the historian who first conceived of the vision of Eden. The idea of lost greatness pervaded the annotations on Morga’s Sucesos de las islas Filipinas. Nothing is more haunting than a sense of good times that have long gone, and nothing perhaps inspires hope like the idea that greatness was once possible and could once again be a reality. 
	The work on the Morga was not perfect from a historical standpoint. It contained at least a few errors which would become the basis for many misconceptions today . But it carried within it a belief in the culture that the Filipinos themselves had before the arrival of Spain. As a work of propaganda, it presented to the Filipino people a radical idea: that Filipinos owed nothing to Spain and must not be fooled by the notion of their inferiority to the Europeans. The past was therefore they key in building Rizal’s vision. “In order to read the destiny of a people, it is necessary to open the book of its past. ” 
	So how would we describe Rizal’s Eden? For one, Rizal himself seems to have described it as the Noli without the friars, the corruption, etc. For him, it is only in the achievement of this ideal that his works could be properly judged. 

	[The Noli can only be judged] when the men whom it pillories and the abuses which it fights have disappeared from [our] country’s political life; when a generation arises which does not participate in the present crimes and immoralities […].  

Eden is, therefore, the Philippines without Padre Damaso, the Franciscan priest who symbolized the stranglehold of the clergy over the country. It is also without Dona Victorina, who looked down upon her own countrymen and aspired to be like those who oppressed the Filipino. It is without Sisas, Crispins, and other victims who never saw the light of justice. It is one where the dreams and hopes of Ibarras do not fail to the scheming of vested interests. Most of all, it is a Filipino people that will not see the in the town of San Diego a reflection of their own reality.  
Eden was also the pre-colonial society that the Spaniards supplanted with their arrival. Rizal’s version of that culture was sometimes embellished with misconceptions and misattributions, as modern Filipino historians now note, but it was a compelling image of a relatively well-off civilization and one which did not benefit from the arrival of the Europeans. Panday Pira, the extensive pre-colonial ship-building industry, among others, may have been exaggerations on Rizal’s part, but they were a crucial piece of Rizal’s vision: the Filipinos were better off alone; the benefits of European contact did not justify the cost. 
Finally, when he was frustrated by the lack of attention paid by Spain to the demands of her colony in Asia, Eden would be the Philippines free from Spain by the actions of its own people. It would take preliminary forms, like Rizal’s abortive North Borneo project but, in the end, our lost Eden would be an independent Philippines and a people who would not be ashamed to call themselves Filipinos. 
Eden is, therefore, the product of despair and pride. In longing for a lost age, and finding frustration in constructing it, Rizal sought this powerful vision. In believing that the Filipino people, despite the depths to which it has sunk, can rise again and control its own destiny, the vision was created and made possible. 
It is too late to go back to the Eden before Rizal’s time; the Filipino now is too different from the Filipino before the arrival of Spain. That does not mean that it is lost to us forever. The pursuit of Rizal’s Eden, the culmination of his vision, has gone on for years. It was Rizal who began that vision, the Katipuneros of 1896 who began to pursue it and it up to the Filipino today to continue to chase that elusive dream. 
	The upheaval of 1896, which was the logical result of the nationalist awakening instigated by Rizal and his contemporaries, did indeed change the country. The entire archipelago was united from north to south against the colonial regime. For the first time, “Filipino” no longer referred to the insulares or to any mere inhabitant of the archipelago. The Revolution awakened the fighting spirit that had lain dormant for three hundred years; it fanned the hopes of independence and the promise of the correction of the ills of the colonial regime. It is easy to imagine that this was “the dawn break” of Rizal’s final poem; the light “though the gloom of the night, to herald the day.”  
	Gone were the Spaniards, and the dominance of the religious orders. Aguinaldo and his government would finally be able to declare the independence of the Philippines from Spanish rule. And yet, the Philippines barely shook off that which the Spaniards left. Granted, the two interludes of 1901 with the Americans and 1942 with the Japanese prevented the full maturation of the Revolution of 1896. However, the ghosts of Spanish rule continued to haunt us in the years after 1946, the official end of the Commonwealth era and the supposed beginning of actual Philippine independence. 
The EDSA Revolution of 1986 also brought about its own change. With a throng of unarmed civilians facing tanks and armed men, it could have ended very differently. The downfall of a dictator who had ruled for more than two decades and the realization of the ideal of People Power would end up affecting Philippine politics until today. 
	In many ways, the two revolutions were different. Where 1896 was the revolt of the “Filipino masses” inspired by the ideals of illustrados who were hesitant to support them, 1986 was the product of an alliance between middle class elements with the public encouragement of the Church in support of a mutinous faction of the military. Still, the two revolutions happened under similar circumstances: a nation cowed under the heels of an oppressive regime. These revolutions were both launched to recover a freedom that was believed to be lost. Both pursued, in one form or another, Rizal’s Eden.
	The successes of the revolutions and movements inspired by Rizal’s vision, however, did not necessarily mean the success of the vision itself. It is one thing to win a revolution, and quite another for it to endure. Whenever Filipinos stare at the reality of incomplete revolutions, we always seem to echo the words of Padre Florentino in the last chapter of the Fili.  

[…] with or without Spain, [our problems] would be the same and perhaps worse. What is the use of independence if the slaves of today will be the tyrants of tomorrow? And no doubt they will, because whoever submits to tyranny loves it. ” 

A hundred fifteen years after San Juan Del Monte and twenty years after EDSA, the Philippines barely qualifies as free. It is free from neither the interference of nations on which it has made itself dependent upon nor the many domestic issues which constantly plague it. There has hardly been an election in recent memory where credible claims of fraud have not surfaced. Political violence continues to erupt in many areas of the country as corruption pervades the government from top to bottom. 
	When revolutions succeed but fail to address the problems that caused them, they in turn make other revolutions and upheavals inevitable. It is relatively easy to change constitutions, presidents, and political systems - Filipinos have already done these multiple times, and many other countries have done the same. However, political change without changing the underlying social conditions is hardly ever lasting or stable. It would only be repainting the Tabo, and replacing some parts but never really correcting the problems that plague it. 
The people standing on the Tabo’s deck have changed, but their indifference to the conditions of those below the deck have not. The boat is still deceptively clean outside, but only time can tell if those below will once again demand change or take matter onto their own hands. For now, the boat sails smoothly, but only barely.
In 1986, the opportunity for social change evaporated as the new Constitution simply preserved the social order and made hollow promises for land reform. The same guns that refused to fire at the throngs gathered at EDSA found themselves firing at farmers gathered in Mendiola. Many of the landed aristocracy managed to hold on to lands they were supposed to give to the farmers who have worked on them for years. The new government in Manila was dominated by vested interests: the owners of vast plantations, families which had turned public offices into birthrights, and others more. 
Neither 1896 nor 1986 corrected the social stratification created by the Spaniards. In 1896, the Spanish peninsulares fled before the Revolution but the Filipino principales did not hesitate to take their place when the dust settled. They were among the last to join the Revolution, and the first to bolt from it when the Americans moved in. 
The theocratic aristocracy of Rizal’s time, as well as the aristocracy of blood that placed the peninsulares over the insulares, and the insulares over the indio has long been lost to the pages of history. However, the years hence have created a new, more powerful aristocracy, that of wealth. Such is the problem for anyone who calls for change today: it is easier to break an existing order when the wealthy are on your side, but when the wealthy and the landed benefit from the status quo, change faces a formidable obstacle. 
As Leon Ma. Guerrero noted in the First Filipino, the heroes of the 1896 Revolution were strangely unaware of the writings of Marx or the socialist movements in Europe. Rizal and Bonifacio both sought liberty for the Philippines but neither seemed to consider the economic equality of the peasant who toiled in fields they did not own and the wealthy merchants who owned the wealth of the country. As our experience shows, liberty cannot be fully sustained amidst inequality, whether political, social, or economic.   
The Philippines may have had three constitutions since the Commonwealth: 1935, 1972, and 1986, but none of them were really revolutionary. Ever since Malolos and until today’s calls for “Charter Change,” the changes that Filipinos in power propose are often linked to political change only; social issues have been untouchable. For the Constitutional Conventions of 1973 and 1986, addressing the concentration of power on the select elite was supposed to be a priority. Instead, these occasions were used as opportunities to consolidate power. In 1973, the work of the convention was suddenly co-opted to legitimize a dictator’s hold on power. In 1986, the convention failed to challenge the iniquities of Philippine society. 
Rizal was only partly right. The slaves of yesterday remain the slaves of today. The tyrants of yesterday simply gave way to those who suffered the least from their tyranny. The tyrants were never completely thrown out by our revolutions. Without Spain; and without America, “we can blame nobody” but ourselves today. 
This lesson of Rizal is clear, just as it was in the Philippines a Century Hence, the current state of affairs cannot continue. The Spaniards of Rizal’s time had to give reforms or they would lose the Philippines. The Filipinos who have the most, especially those who form the government have to stop giving half-measures and finally give genuine change. Eden cannot be enjoyed by the few at the expense of the many. Otherwise, the suffering masses demanding Eden will overtake them and the people will either secure change for themselves or continue the pointless cycle of “winning” freedom over and over again. 
The constant problem has always been that we Filipinos have been better at uniting in opposition to something than in support of something. So long as there are common enemies, it is easy to find common ground but when our enemies are gone and it’s time to create the alternative, we have ended up fighting amongst ourselves and compromising the values that drove our national unity. So it was with Bonifacio and Aguinaldo; with the coalition of 1986; and so it will be until we are ready to fight for the aftermath of our own revolutions. Not only must we as a nation “deserve” our freedom, we should also learn to build from the ashes. 
And it is perhaps the life of Rizal which offers the path to secure our preferred aftermaths. Rizal was frustrated by the state of education in the country; with the guardia civil who acted with impunity; and with the Church that sought to maintain its prime position in the courts of Manila and the minds of the people. The experiences of Rizal echo nowadays in the country’s political debate. They challenge us to ask ourselves if our country is headed toward the right direction.
The priorities of today are the realities of tomorrow. A nation that spends barely three percent  of its budget to educate the next generation betrays the ideals of the illustrados and of Rizal. The average Filipino can hardly expect to reach college, or be able to afford it. 
The education system today can be Placido Penitente’s Santo Tomas, where the hard-working student is frustrated by the small-mindedness of teachers and the confused drivel they pass for knowledge. Alternatively, it can be Rizal’s Ateneo, the school which gave him the “happiest days” of his life and started his path toward the pursuit of knowledge. Today, these schools are much changed as they were from Rizal’s time, but they have their counterparts in our own time. 
In the past decade, the budget for education has remained embarrassingly low even as population growth forced enrollement figures upward onto an overworked public school system. One wonders what Rizal, who placed a great premium on education, might think about the large-classes pervading the Philippine school system or its underpaid and often under qualified teachers. 
There are many good schools in this country, but most are only open to the aristocracy of the wealthy and unreachable for many Filipinos. The rest of the country has to make do with the struggling mass that is the public school system, or get into the science high school system, or qualify for the high standards set by scholarship grants. 
The ghosts of Placido Penitente, the frustrated student; and of Padre Millon, the small-minded teacher haunt us today. A badly-run education system is a dangerous thing: it not only fails to teach what needs to be learned, it kills the love of learning and leaves its students in a state worse than ignorance. And ignorance is hardly the state we wish to find ourselves in. If our society intends to build Eden, it needs the skills that only an education can give. If our society wishes to offer Eden to both rich and poor alike, it needs to open “the great equalizer” to all. 
Education was the cornerstone of Rizal’s vision for the country. It was the solution offered by Rizal through the words of Padre Florentino in the Fili. It is education that facilitates the building of a society capable of governing itself. It is also the vehicle by which one generation imparts Rizal’s vision to another. It is also education which opens many windows for the possibilities of the future. Especially today, when progress and advancement require trained specialists in many fields, the education of future generations is critical for the success of a nation. 
Competing for attention with the education of today’s Filipinos is the military which supports the Filipino state. Depending on one’s perspective, our soldiers are either the heirs of the Katipunan or the Guardia Civil. The former fought for the rights of the oppressed and advanced the causes of justice and freedom in the Philippines; the latter represented collaboration with the forces of oppression and Filipinos turning on their countrymen at the whim of the ruling elite. 
We can debate the effects of our perpetual state of struggle with the rebels in Mindanao and the mountains of Quezon but that is beside the point. Rizal’s experience with Guardia Civil points to the greatest danger any free person faces from a military establishment: the abuse of power and the violation of human rights. As such, we are confronted with that danger as rumours of “destabilization” prop up every now and then, and stories of corruption and abuses in the military abound.   
The military has the potential to support Rizal’s vision by refusing to support tyrants as they did at EDSA, by remaining neutral amidst the political intrigues of the country, or simply by doing its duty to protect the Filipino nation from future oppressors. But the military is also capable of acting to hinder the vision, which has always been vulnerable to the force of arms. This is not a hypothetical event, the news is filled with allegations of corruption in the military and the police; with stories of disappearances of civilians and abuses by uniformed men.
To echo Elias in the Noli, reforms must be made to ensure that uniformed men are not allowed to abuse the powers vested in them. The needs of democracy and of the Eden of Rizal’s visions require constant vigilance. The guns that protect us are easily turned on us. It is not worth it to place the hopes of Eden on so unreliable a protector. An education may not have saved Rizal from death but it is a greater guarantee for Rizal’s ideal than the fleeting force of arms. 
Finally, we are confronted with the question of the Church, Rizal’s most tenacious enemy. The friar orders have lost most of their influence; the parishes may have been secularized and are now run by Filipino priests; and the influence of the clergy has been diminished but the Philippines continues to grapple with the politics of religion. 
The Catholic Church in the Philippines is no longer alone today. It shares its role with various charismatic groups, independent Churches, and other religions. In a very religious country where passion often dominates questions of faith, it is to be expected that the religious would hold a powerful influence in the lives of many. 
Given that, which face does our clergy prefer: that of Damaso the bully and Sibyla the calculating? Or of Fernandez the understanding, and Florentino the insightful? The answer to that question might well determine the fate of Eden. 
Let us pause to consider that the same moral voice that condemned Rizal as a heretic and once considered his works blasphemous was the same voice the called for the ouster of Marcos. It is also noteworthy that one of the primary advocates against poverty in the country is also among the most vehement of opponents in the establishment of a national population policy to prevent it. Rizal may have despised most of the clergy in the 19th century and disagree, but he can certainly share some common cause with their successors today even as he disagrees in other ways. The two have different versions of Eden: one material, and one ethereal. However, it does not mean that the pursuit of one should necessarily hinder the pursuit of the other. 
But still, Rizal’s vision requires the courage to resist blind obedience and deference to religion. Whenever a candidate running for election panders to various religious leaders for endorsements and support, we see the echoes of the governor-generals who were ousted at the behest of the friars. The moral compass remains a two-edged sword: ready to guide with one hand, and to suppress dissent with the other. 
The consequences have been enormous: Catholic values about the family are ingrained in the 1986 Constitution, our politicians refrain from openly defying prominent religious congregations, and the country is deprived of such things as a coherent national population policy. Many of the most prominent schools, colleges, and universities in the country are run by the religious orders, just as they were in Rizal’s time. The debates on “reproductive health” today echo the same debates over the Rizal Law in the 1950s and the reforms demanded in Rizal’s time. We are reminded very poignantly that we have not yet fully exorcised the ghost of Padre Damaso from our consciousness. 
The issues of today affect the realization of our vision of Eden. The priorities we choose today will affect a whole generation of Filipinos. The lack of attention paid to education, the overindulgence of the military establishment, and the special attention paid to the religious are echoes of the issues which were raised by Rizal and the propagandist. If we fail to push for the priorities we need today and allow our leaders to continue the present course, then we endanger the realization of that vision and our own interests in the process.
Another lesson of Rizal should not be forgotten, however; and this is perhaps the most important part of the vision of Eden. In the age of globalization, it is easy to forgo and even condemn the values of nationalism. Every year, thousands of Filipinos go abroad to seek the Eden they cannot find in the Philippines. Many will be gone for years to find work that can only be justified by the desperation caused by poverty and deprivation back home. Others will never return, content and happy in the new countries they would then call home. 
Was this not the problem Rizal faced with his fellow propagandists, a sense of abandonment of the Filipino nation? When faced with this dilemma, he took to the conclusion that the fight must be fought in the Philippines and no longer in the alleys of Barcelona, or the courts of Madrid. True, his sometimes vacillating nature confounded this message during his time but, eventually, he would accept that Eden must be built and realized here in the Philippines.  
Even Rizal, in the belief that the time for Revolution might not come within his lifetime, tried to build Eden in another land. He laid out the plans for a “New Calamba” in North Borneo so that the taste of freedom could be given to some of his fellow Filipinos sooner rather than later. But this project was not to be. In a surprisingly patriotic tone, a Spanish consul would tell Rizal that “it was not very patriotic to take [Filipinos] to cultivate foreign soil. Any Filipino can contribute freely to the prosperity of the country anywhere in [the Philippines].”  This reply, meant for Rizal, is still as correct to us today as it must have been for Rizal. 
The Filipino workers and migrants who go abroad to support their families may deserve to be called heroes, just as the Filipino expatriates in Europe who relentlessly attacked the colonial government are honoured today. But the vision handed down to us by the Propagandists and the Revolution cannot be built without entrepreneurs or scientists; it cannot be realized without agriculturalists, doctors, engineers, and other thinkers and professionals. Desperation might force many to seek education or work in foreign lands and alien seas but the ideal Philippines of Rizal and the propagandists is one which is can only be made possible by Filipinos here in the Philippines who believe in that ideal.
So it was with Rizal, and so it is, with a few qualifications, with us today. We return to despair and pride: a despair that can only give way to hope, and a pride that makes the Filipino believe that all things are possible. The Philippines can no longer do with one Rizal alone; it needs every Filipino to adopt a part of Rizal. It is time for us to think and consider. Are we ready to live and fight here in the Philippines? Are we ready to advance once more the ideas of Revolution with our own minds, and our own efforts? 
	Will the Philippines be truly free? So long as the vision of Eden continues to persist in our minds, it will remain likely. For now, we might content ourselves with half-empty glasses or the scraps from the tables of the mighty but, sooner or later, people will once again crave for Rizal’s vision. 
	Rizal was the prophet of the Filipino nation. At times, he vacillated; in others, he acted against the dictates of caution. He issued the warnings to Spain that they could either give in to reform or face revolution. He sounded the call to the Filipinos to take destiny in their own hands in due time. The Spanish left him unheeded, and the Filipinos misunderstood. In the end, he ended up lighting the spark of the revolution that would end his life. 
	He was born one hundred fifty years ago, at a time when the Filipino people had lost all hope in their own ability as a nation. He would die leaving the Philippines with a will to fight and a vision that its people could believe in. The shots in Bagumbayan were supposed to kill Rizal, and the Revolution of 1896 along with him. But a part of Rizal did not die; he came up with an idea, and that idea forged both the Filipino nation, and the Revolution. The visionary may die, but his visions cannot. 
That is the reason why Rizal remains important to us today, simply because the ideas he created did not die. The irony is that Rizal cannot be put to rest until the injustices and problems he faced are dealt with. This year, as we commemorate his 150th birth anniversary, we remember not only the immortality of his legacy, but also our own failure to advance his vision after so many years.  So long as there is corruption in the government, or an indifferent aristocracy, or injustice in the country, or there are Filipinos who believe that the Philippines is a lost cause, Rizal cannot die. 
The picture of the Philippines he gave us more than a hundred years ago is all too recognizable. The hope that was given to us by his vision of Eden remains too irresistible.
