The Philippines in the 21st century is a country still trying to find its identity. One need only look at the contrast between the prosperous business districts of Manila, and the squalid slums that stand sometimes just a few blocks away to see the difference between the competing visions and versions of our country. In the south, a decades-long insurgency has created a confusing state of affairs between a vacillating central government, powerful local warlords, and ever evolving and changing separatists.
	The question was asked more than a hundred years ago. A hundred years hence, will the Philippines be free? Today, the answer can be as complex as the man who asked the question. Is a land with a yawning gap between rich and poor really free? Is a country that has to tolerate, and even encourage, the emigration of its educated professionals to foreign lands deserving of the term independent? 
	In his untitled last poem, Jose Rizal bade farewell to “el Perle del Mar de Oriente, nuestro perdido Eden .” Of course, he was talking about the Philippines; one which has lived under Spanish domination for three centuries. The Eden of Rizal’s “Mi Ultimo Adios” perhaps summarized one of Rizal’s greatest and most enduring legacies, his vision for the Filipino people. For his contemporaries, it would ignite hope and, eventually, a revolution. But now, more than a century after, it seems we have yet to find this lost Eden. 
	. The persistence of Rizal today is due to many things: his writings, his role in Philippine history, the controversies that surround him, the legally enforced teaching of his life and works in Philippine schools. However, those alone cannot explain the pervasiveness of Rizal in the Filipino consciousness. Novels often go unread and misunderstood. Revolutions come and go; succeed or fail. It is the ideal set by Rizal that captures our imaginations up until today, a free country with an enlightened and educated populace taking its rightful place among the nations. 
	Rizal would do many things in the course of his short life. But perhaps the best place to start in understanding his vision is his own picture of Philippine society in the closing years of the 19th century. Here, Rizal the novelist and, in some ways, the journalist, would fire the opening shots of the nationalist awakening. 
	 The Philippines of Rizal’s time was the Tabo, the round boat of the opening chapters of the El Filibusterismo. It symbolized much of what was wrong with Spanish colonial regime. The engine not could steer without the tikin much as the colonial government could not move without the Church. The deck separated the two primary classes of the colonial period: those with Spanish blood and their select few collaborators; and those without. The contrast between the boat’s whitewashed exterior, and its dirty interior might as well have been applied to the stark differences between the idealized picture of a loyal colony, and the harsh realities of the mismanaged and exploited country. 
	The Philippines was also the town of San Diego, the setting of the Noli Me Tangere, where hard work, good intentions, a good education, and even connections to the governor-general did not protect Ibarra from the caprices of the pious aristocracy of the religious orders. The town contained many of the ills that Rizal denounced in his time: the expensive and frivolous celebration of feasts, the licentiousness and hypocrisy of the clergy and the society they dominated, the degeneration of Filipino society through drug use and gambling, and a people so convinced by their own inferiority. 

	This was the reality that the Noli and the Fili attacked. Rizal as a novelist created a realistic picture of the Philippines of his own time. As a journalist, he reported on what he saw and experienced about Spanish colonial rule. It was the present by which Rizal would contrast and construct his vision for the future. 
	It was perhaps Rizal the historian who first conceived of the vision of Eden. The idea of lost greatness pervaded the annotations on Morga’s Sucesos de las islas Filipinas. Nothing is more haunting than a sense of good times that have long gone, and nothing perhaps inspires hope like the idea that greatness was once possible and could once again be a reality. 
	The work on the Morga was not perfect from a historical standpoint. It contained at least a few errors which would become the basis for many misconceptions today . But it carried within it a belief in the culture that the Filipinos themselves had before the arrival of Spain. As a work of propaganda, it presented to the Filipino people a radical idea: that Filipinos owed nothing to Spain and must not be fooled by the notion of their inferiority to the Europeans. The past was therefore they key in building Rizal’s vision. “In order to read the destiny of a people, it is necessary to open the book of its past. ” 
	So how would we describe Rizal’s Eden? For one, Rizal himself seems to have described it as the Noli without the friars, the corruption, etc. For him, it is only in the achievement of this ideal that his works could be properly judged. 

	[The Noli can only be judged] when the men whom it pillories and the abuses which it fights have disappeared from [our] country’s political life; when a generation arises which does not participate in the present crimes and immoralities […].  

Eden is, therefore, the Philippines without Padre Damaso, the Franciscan priest who symbolized the stranglehold of the clergy over the country. It is also without Dona Victorina, who looked down upon her own countrymen and aspired to be like those who oppressed the Filipino. It is without Sisas, Crispins, and other victims who never saw the light of justice. It is one where the dreams and hopes of Ibarras do not fail to the scheming of vested interests. Most of all, it is a Filipino people that will not see the in the town of San Diego a reflection of their own reality.  
Eden was also the pre-colonial society that the Spaniards supplanted with their arrival. Rizal’s version of that culture was sometimes embellished with misconceptions and misattributions, as modern Filipino historians now note, but it was a compelling image of a relatively well-off civilization and one which did not benefit from the arrival of the Europeans. Panday Pira, the extensive pre-colonial ship-building industry, among others, may have been exaggerations on Rizal’s part, but they were a crucial piece of Rizal’s vision: the Filipinos were better off alone; the benefits of European contact did not justify the cost. 
Finally, when he was frustrated by the lack of attention paid by Spain to the demands of her colony in Asia, Eden would be the Philippines free from Spain by the actions of its own people. It would take preliminary forms, like Rizal’s abortive North Borneo project but, in the end, our lost Eden would be an independent Philippines and a people who would not be ashamed to call themselves Filipinos. 
Eden is, therefore, the product of despair and pride. In longing for a lost age, and finding frustration in constructing it, Rizal sought this powerful vision. In believing that the Filipino people, despite the depths to which it has sunk, can rise again and control its own destiny, the vision was created and made possible. 
It is too late to go back to the Eden before Rizal’s time; the Filipino now is too different from the Filipino before the arrival of Spain. That does not mean that it is lost to us forever. The pursuit of Rizal’s Eden, the culmination of his vision, has gone on for years. It was Rizal who began that vision, the Katipuneros of 1896 who began to pursue it and it up to the Filipino today to continue to chase that elusive dream. 
	The upheaval of 1896, which was the logical result of the nationalist awakening instigated by Rizal and his contemporaries, did indeed change the country. The entire archipelago was united from north to south against the colonial regime. For the first time, “Filipino” no longer referred to the insulares or to any mere inhabitant of the archipelago. The Revolution awakened the fighting spirit that had lain dormant for three hundred years; it fanned the hopes of independence and the promise of the correction of the ills of the colonial regime. It is easy to imagine that this was “the dawn break” of Rizal’s final poem; the light “though the gloom of the night, to herald the day.”  
	Gone were the Spaniards, and the dominance of the religious orders. Aguinaldo and his government would finally be able to declare the independence of the Philippines from Spanish rule. And yet, the Philippines barely shook off that which the Spaniards left. Granted, the two interludes of 1901 with the Americans and 1942 with the Japanese prevented the full maturation of the Revolution of 1896. However, the ghosts of Spanish rule continued to haunt us in the years after 1946, the official end of the Commonwealth era and the supposed beginning of actual Philippine independence. 
The EDSA Revolution of 1986 also brought about its own change. With a throng of unarmed civilians facing tanks and armed men, it could have ended very differently. The downfall of a dictator who had ruled for more than two decades and the realization of the ideal of People Power would end up affecting Philippine politics until today. 
	In many ways, the two revolutions were different. Where 1896 was the revolt of the “Filipino masses” inspired by the ideals of illustrados who were hesitant to support them, 1986 was the product of an alliance between middle class elements with the public encouragement of the Church in support of a mutinous faction of the military. Still, the two revolutions happened under similar circumstances: a nation cowed under the heels of an oppressive regime. These revolutions were both launched to recover a freedom that was believed to be lost. Both pursued, in one form or another, Rizal’s Eden.
	The successes of the revolutions and movements inspired by Rizal’s vision, however, did not necessarily mean the success of the vision itself. It is one thing to win a revolution, and quite another for it to endure. Whenever Filipinos stare at the reality of incomplete revolutions, we always seem to echo the words of Padre Florentino in the last chapter of the Fili.  

[…] with or without Spain, [our problems] would be the same and perhaps worse. What is the use of independence if the slaves of today will be the tyrants of tomorrow? And no doubt they will, because whoever submits to tyranny loves it. ” 

A hundred fifteen years after San Juan Del Monte and twenty years after EDSA, the Philippines barely qualifies as free. It is free from neither the interference of nations on which it has made itself dependent upon nor the many domestic issues which constantly plague it. There has hardly been an election in recent memory where credible claims of fraud have not surfaced. Political violence continues to erupt in many areas of the country as corruption pervades the government from top to bottom. 
	When revolutions succeed but fail to address the problems that caused them, they in turn make other revolutions and upheavals inevitable. It is relatively easy to change constitutions, presidents, and political systems - Filipinos have already done these multiple times, and many other countries have done the same. However, political change without changing the underlying social conditions is hardly ever lasting or stable. It would only be repainting the Tabo, and replacing some parts but never really correcting the problems that plague it. 
The people standing on the Tabo’s deck have changed, but their indifference to the conditions of those below the deck have not. The boat is still deceptively clean outside, but only time can tell if those below will once again demand change or take matter onto their own hands. For now, the boat sails smoothly, but only barely.
In 1986, the opportunity for social change evaporated as the new Constitution simply preserved the social order and made hollow promises for land reform. The same guns that refused to fire at the throngs gathered at EDSA found themselves firing at farmers gathered in Mendiola. Many of the landed aristocracy managed to hold on to lands they were supposed to give to the farmers who have worked on them for years. The new government in Manila was dominated by vested interests: the owners of vast plantations, families which had turned public offices into birthrights, and others more. 
Neither 1896 nor 1986 corrected the social stratification created by the Spaniards. In 1896, the Spanish peninsulares fled before the Revolution but the Filipino principales did not hesitate to take their place when the dust settled. They were among the last to join the Revolution, and the first to bolt from it when the Americans moved in. 
The theocratic aristocracy of Rizal’s time, as well as the aristocracy of blood that placed the peninsulares over the insulares, and the insulares over the indio has long been lost to the pages of history. However, the years hence have created a new, more powerful aristocracy, that of wealth. Such is the problem for anyone who calls for change today: it is easier to break an existing order when the wealthy are on your side, but when the wealthy and the landed benefit from the status quo, change faces a formidable obstacle. 
As Leon Ma. Guerrero noted in the First Filipino, the heroes of the 1896 Revolution were strangely unaware of the writings of Marx or the socialist movements in Europe. Rizal and Bonifacio both sought liberty for the Philippines but neither seemed to consider the economic equality of the peasant who toiled in fields they did not own and the wealthy merchants who owned the wealth of the country. As our experience shows, liberty cannot be fully sustained amidst inequality, whether political, social, or economic.   
The Philippines may have had three constitutions since the Commonwealth: 1935, 1972, and 1986, but none of them were really revolutionary. Ever since Malolos and until today’s calls for “Charter Change,” the changes that Filipinos in power propose are often linked to political change only; social issues have been untouchable. For the Constitutional Conventions of 1973 and 1986, addressing the concentration of power on the select elite was supposed to be a priority. Instead, these occasions were used as opportunities to consolidate power. In 1973, the work of the convention was suddenly co-opted to legitimize a dictator’s hold on power. In 1986, the convention failed to challenge the iniquities of Philippine society. 
Rizal was only partly right. The slaves of yesterday remain the slaves of today. The tyrants of yesterday simply gave way to those who suffered the least from their tyranny. The tyrants were never completely thrown out by our revolutions. Without Spain; and without America, “we can blame nobody” but ourselves today. 
This lesson of Rizal is clear, just as it was in the Philippines a Century Hence, the current state of affairs cannot continue. The Spaniards of Rizal’s time had to give reforms or they would lose the Philippines. The Filipinos who have the most, especially those who form the government have to stop giving half-measures and finally give genuine change. Eden cannot be enjoyed by the few at the expense of the many. Otherwise, the suffering masses demanding Eden will overtake them and the people will either secure change for themselves or continue the pointless cycle of “winning” freedom over and over again. 
The constant problem has always been that we Filipinos have been better at uniting in opposition to something than in support of something. So long as there are common enemies, it is easy to find common ground but when our enemies are gone and it’s time to create the alternative, we have ended up fighting amongst ourselves and compromising the values that drove our national unity. So it was with Bonifacio and Aguinaldo; with the coalition of 1986; and so it will be until we are ready to fight for the aftermath of our own revolutions. Not only must we as a nation “deserve” our freedom, we should also learn to build from the ashes. 
And it is perhaps the life of Rizal which offers the path to secure our preferred aftermaths. Rizal was frustrated by the state of education in the country; with the guardia civil who acted with impunity; and with the Church that sought to maintain its prime position in the courts of Manila and the minds of the people. The experiences of Rizal echo nowadays in the country’s political debate. They challenge us to ask ourselves if our country is headed toward the right direction.
The priorities of today are the realities of tomorrow. A nation that spends barely three percent  of its budget to educate the next generation betrays the ideals of the illustrados and of Rizal. The average Filipino can hardly expect to reach college, or be able to afford it. 
The education system today can be Placido Penitente’s Santo Tomas, where the hard-working student is frustrated by the small-mindedness of teachers and the confused drivel they pass for knowledge. Alternatively, it can be Rizal’s Ateneo, the school which gave him the “happiest days” of his life and started his path toward the pursuit of knowledge. Today, these schools are much changed as they were from Rizal’s time, but they have their counterparts in our own time. 
In the past decade, the budget for education has remained embarrassingly low even as population growth forced enrollement figures upward onto an overworked public school system. One wonders what Rizal, who placed a great premium on education, might think about the large-classes pervading the Philippine school system or its underpaid and often under qualified teachers. 
There are many good schools in this country, but most are only open to the aristocracy of the wealthy and unreachable for many Filipinos. The rest of the country has to make do with the struggling mass that is the public school system, or get into the science high school system, or qualify for the high standards set by scholarship grants. 
The ghosts of Placido Penitente, the frustrated student; and of Padre Millon, the small-minded teacher haunt us today. A badly-run education system is a dangerous thing: it not only fails to teach what needs to be learned, it kills the love of learning and leaves its students in a state worse than ignorance. And ignorance is hardly the state we wish to find ourselves in. If our society intends to build Eden, it needs the skills that only an education can give. If our society wishes to offer Eden to both rich and poor alike, it needs to open “the great equalizer” to all. 
Education was the cornerstone of Rizal’s vision for the country. It was the solution offered by Rizal through the words of Padre Florentino in the Fili. It is education that facilitates the building of a society capable of governing itself. It is also the vehicle by which one generation imparts Rizal’s vision to another. It is also education which opens many windows for the possibilities of the future. Especially today, when progress and advancement require trained specialists in many fields, the education of future generations is critical for the success of a nation. 
Competing for attention with the education of today’s Filipinos is the military which supports the Filipino state. Depending on one’s perspective, our soldiers are either the heirs of the Katipunan or the Guardia Civil. The former fought for the rights of the oppressed and advanced the causes of justice and freedom in the Philippines; the latter represented collaboration with the forces of oppression and Filipinos turning on their countrymen at the whim of the ruling elite. 
We can debate the effects of our perpetual state of struggle with the rebels in Mindanao and the mountains of Quezon but that is beside the point. Rizal’s experience with Guardia Civil points to the greatest danger any free person faces from a military establishment: the abuse of power and the violation of human rights. As such, we are confronted with that danger as rumours of “destabilization” prop up every now and then, and stories of corruption and abuses in the military abound.   
The military has the potential to support Rizal’s vision by refusing to support tyrants as they did at EDSA, by remaining neutral amidst the political intrigues of the country, or simply by doing its duty to protect the Filipino nation from future oppressors. But the military is also capable of acting to hinder the vision, which has always been vulnerable to the force of arms. This is not a hypothetical event, the news is filled with allegations of corruption in the military and the police; with stories of disappearances of civilians and abuses by uniformed men.
To echo Elias in the Noli, reforms must be made to ensure that uniformed men are not allowed to abuse the powers vested in them. The needs of democracy and of the Eden of Rizal’s visions require constant vigilance. The guns that protect us are easily turned on us. It is not worth it to place the hopes of Eden on so unreliable a protector. An education may not have saved Rizal from death but it is a greater guarantee for Rizal’s ideal than the fleeting force of arms. 
Finally, we are confronted with the question of the Church, Rizal’s most tenacious enemy. The friar orders have lost most of their influence; the parishes may have been secularized and are now run by Filipino priests; and the influence of the clergy has been diminished but the Philippines continues to grapple with the politics of religion. 
The Catholic Church in the Philippines is no longer alone today. It shares its role with various charismatic groups, independent Churches, and other religions. In a very religious country where passion often dominates questions of faith, it is to be expected that the religious would hold a powerful influence in the lives of many. 
Given that, which face does our clergy prefer: that of Damaso the bully and Sibyla the calculating? Or of Fernandez the understanding, and Florentino the insightful? The answer to that question might well determine the fate of Eden. 
Let us pause to consider that the same moral voice that condemned Rizal as a heretic and once considered his works blasphemous was the same voice the called for the ouster of Marcos. It is also noteworthy that one of the primary advocates against poverty in the country is also among the most vehement of opponents in the establishment of a national population policy to prevent it. Rizal may have despised most of the clergy in the 19th century and disagree, but he can certainly share some common cause with their successors today even as he disagrees in other ways. The two have different versions of Eden: one material, and one ethereal. However, it does not mean that the pursuit of one should necessarily hinder the pursuit of the other. 
But still, Rizal’s vision requires the courage to resist blind obedience and deference to religion. Whenever a candidate running for election panders to various religious leaders for endorsements and support, we see the echoes of the governor-generals who were ousted at the behest of the friars. The moral compass remains a two-edged sword: ready to guide with one hand, and to suppress dissent with the other. 
The consequences have been enormous: Catholic values about the family are ingrained in the 1986 Constitution, our politicians refrain from openly defying prominent religious congregations, and the country is deprived of such things as a coherent national population policy. Many of the most prominent schools, colleges, and universities in the country are run by the religious orders, just as they were in Rizal’s time. The debates on “reproductive health” today echo the same debates over the Rizal Law in the 1950s and the reforms demanded in Rizal’s time. We are reminded very poignantly that we have not yet fully exorcised the ghost of Padre Damaso from our consciousness. 
The issues of today affect the realization of our vision of Eden. The priorities we choose today will affect a whole generation of Filipinos. The lack of attention paid to education, the overindulgence of the military establishment, and the special attention paid to the religious are echoes of the issues which were raised by Rizal and the propagandist. If we fail to push for the priorities we need today and allow our leaders to continue the present course, then we endanger the realization of that vision and our own interests in the process.
Another lesson of Rizal should not be forgotten, however; and this is perhaps the most important part of the vision of Eden. In the age of globalization, it is easy to forgo and even condemn the values of nationalism. Every year, thousands of Filipinos go abroad to seek the Eden they cannot find in the Philippines. Many will be gone for years to find work that can only be justified by the desperation caused by poverty and deprivation back home. Others will never return, content and happy in the new countries they would then call home. 
Was this not the problem Rizal faced with his fellow propagandists, a sense of abandonment of the Filipino nation? When faced with this dilemma, he took to the conclusion that the fight must be fought in the Philippines and no longer in the alleys of Barcelona, or the courts of Madrid. True, his sometimes vacillating nature confounded this message during his time but, eventually, he would accept that Eden must be built and realized here in the Philippines.  
Even Rizal, in the belief that the time for Revolution might not come within his lifetime, tried to build Eden in another land. He laid out the plans for a “New Calamba” in North Borneo so that the taste of freedom could be given to some of his fellow Filipinos sooner rather than later. But this project was not to be. In a surprisingly patriotic tone, a Spanish consul would tell Rizal that “it was not very patriotic to take [Filipinos] to cultivate foreign soil. Any Filipino can contribute freely to the prosperity of the country anywhere in [the Philippines].”  This reply, meant for Rizal, is still as correct to us today as it must have been for Rizal. 
The Filipino workers and migrants who go abroad to support their families may deserve to be called heroes, just as the Filipino expatriates in Europe who relentlessly attacked the colonial government are honoured today. But the vision handed down to us by the Propagandists and the Revolution cannot be built without entrepreneurs or scientists; it cannot be realized without agriculturalists, doctors, engineers, and other thinkers and professionals. Desperation might force many to seek education or work in foreign lands and alien seas but the ideal Philippines of Rizal and the propagandists is one which is can only be made possible by Filipinos here in the Philippines who believe in that ideal.
So it was with Rizal, and so it is, with a few qualifications, with us today. We return to despair and pride: a despair that can only give way to hope, and a pride that makes the Filipino believe that all things are possible. The Philippines can no longer do with one Rizal alone; it needs every Filipino to adopt a part of Rizal. It is time for us to think and consider. Are we ready to live and fight here in the Philippines? Are we ready to advance once more the ideas of Revolution with our own minds, and our own efforts? 
	Will the Philippines be truly free? So long as the vision of Eden continues to persist in our minds, it will remain likely. For now, we might content ourselves with half-empty glasses or the scraps from the tables of the mighty but, sooner or later, people will once again crave for Rizal’s vision. 
	Rizal was the prophet of the Filipino nation. At times, he vacillated; in others, he acted against the dictates of caution. He issued the warnings to Spain that they could either give in to reform or face revolution. He sounded the call to the Filipinos to take destiny in their own hands in due time. The Spanish left him unheeded, and the Filipinos misunderstood. In the end, he ended up lighting the spark of the revolution that would end his life. 
	He was born one hundred fifty years ago, at a time when the Filipino people had lost all hope in their own ability as a nation. He would die leaving the Philippines with a will to fight and a vision that its people could believe in. The shots in Bagumbayan were supposed to kill Rizal, and the Revolution of 1896 along with him. But a part of Rizal did not die; he came up with an idea, and that idea forged both the Filipino nation, and the Revolution. The visionary may die, but his visions cannot. 
That is the reason why Rizal remains important to us today, simply because the ideas he created did not die. The irony is that Rizal cannot be put to rest until the injustices and problems he faced are dealt with. This year, as we commemorate his 150th birth anniversary, we remember not only the immortality of his legacy, but also our own failure to advance his vision after so many years.  So long as there is corruption in the government, or an indifferent aristocracy, or injustice in the country, or there are Filipinos who believe that the Philippines is a lost cause, Rizal cannot die. 
The picture of the Philippines he gave us more than a hundred years ago is all too recognizable. The hope that was given to us by his vision of Eden remains too irresistible.

Language is one of those complicated things that manages to cause me some grief from time to time. I’d like to think of myself as trying to adhere to the principle of speaking in the language I’m spoken to. My school for eleven years consistently implemented a “Speak in English” policy every year ensuring that the teachers would speak to me mostly in English. Conversely, I grew up in a student culture that frowned upon the English speaking conyo culture. The result is that I often used English with my own teachers, and Filipino when conversing with fellow students. I used Taglish as needed, mostly as a means to amuse myself.

In terms of proficiency and fluency with language, I am equally adept with both English and Filipino.  Taglish slips in during those informal conversations where I use English for saying things that I’m used to saying in Filipino, or the vice-versa situation. I tend to use them both, but for quite different situations, and to different ends. My respect for Filipino is a relatively new phenomenon, which has stemmed from my shaking off of the “Speak in English” mentality I caught in High School. However, that doesn’t mean I neglected to use Filipino.  In fact, I have never wanted of opportunities for using both my languages due to my old policy of speaking in “the language I’m spoken to.” There is that and the already mentioned dichotomy of using Filipino with friends and equals; and English for teachers, superiors, and formal settings. 

Whenever I speak, I tend to find either straight English or Filipino the easiest to use in theory, but find in practice that Taglish tends to be more natural and simply comes out in certain situations. Of course, I find Filipino easier to use in normal speech; and English in academic speech. I believe that this is mostly due to practice, and the biases of those two different “worlds.” However, I find that Taglish tends to creep out naturally in certain moments when I try to recite in Filipino; or when I try to converse with my stateside mom in straight English. It appears that being unused to using a language in one situation might lead to more unguarded speech, and exhibit a lot of unintended code switching. 

In writing, I find it easiest to write in either English. Even when I’m free to use any language for writing, I tend to prefer using English, at least at the start. I just find it easy to produce sentences in English, maybe because my vocabulary is more diverse in this language. Also, I do most of my writing for academic purposes, an area for which my English is especially honed, as opposed to Tagalog, where most of my worlds are for informal usage. However, for informal writing, I find that my preference for English is unable to prevent the occasional conversion into Taglish, especially when I am writing to entertain. Writing in pure Taglish is much more difficult than writing in either just Filipino or just English because words from both languages don’t just come together naturally, and slips of the tongue which characterize a lot of my spoken Taglish are easier to correct. As for Filipino, I find it hard to write in this language. Filipino, in my opinion, tends to be long-winding in its written form and my vocabulary just isn’t good. I can come up with more than a dozen words for beauty in English, but only a handful in Filipino. Another factor is preference, I just can’t make it a preference to use Filipino for writing when typing Filipino words floods my spell check with shades of red. 

For listening and reading, I find that I can do both well in both Filipino and English, as well as Taglish. My favourite local literature, for example, uses Taglish, and I find it more entertaining and natural to read pure Tagalog, but maybe a bit less than  reading in English only. I do a lot of reading in English: from textbooks to internet pages; from newspapers to novels. Still, I can also read well in Filipino. The same goes for listening, I can follow both English and Tagalog lectures easily at school and sermons in both languages at church. In this respect, I think that things are very similar with respect to listening and reading because receiving does not confuse me as much as generation of thoughts with respect to shifting from one language to another. 

The question of which language produces my best oral and written output is also a question of situation. In general, I feel that my best written output is in English as I’ve used it for that purpose enough times to see how well I can write in English; and correct my mistakes, whenever I make them. I still make good outputs in Filipino, and rather entertaining ones in Taglish, but it’s with English that I can produce the best writing, probably due to practice and comfortability with it in its written form. 

I think the state Of course, I could make more frequent use of Filipino, which will always be my first language.  In fact, that is my greatest wish for my bilingualism because I do admire my mother tongue or at least what I think is my mother tongue. I think I would appreciate more opportunities to use Filipino, in the same way that academic writing often encourages, even forces, me to use English. I would be ashamed if ever I forgot how to speak Filipino fluently.  A more important thing for me, I find myself having an urge to be more than a bilingual, meaning I want to learn more languages. Languages like Spanish, which I am on the process of learning, and Arabic. 

The term “beer goggles” can apply to two phenomena: the blurring of vision as a result of exposure to alcohol, or the perceived increase in attractiveness of individuals when you’ve been drinking. Being a non-drinker, I haven’t experience either; but I find that talking about the cognitive equivalent of me losing my glasses is much less interesting than the ways by which alcohol can make brain functions go awry. 

We are naturally shaped by evolution to be attuned to attractiveness when looking for potential mates. When initiating interactions, one important consideration is how pretty or handsome the person is. Not only is the ability to judge attractiveness important from the evolutionary perspective; so is the accompanying ability to resist hooking up with the first potential mate in the hopes of finding a better-looking one at a future time. 

This is where alcohol comes in. Even slight alcohol consumption inflates judgments of attractiveness of other people. The “beer goggles” effect seems to be elicited at low to moderate levels of alcohol (Lyvers et al., 2009) Think of it as alcohol influencing cognition in two ways: we give higher ratings of attractiveness; and we set lower thresholds of whatever we consider attractive. Thus, at low level of alcohol, people would generally find others more attractive and be more open to interaction. There is also this bit about increased sexual drive. 

The first whiff of alcohol enters the blood stream through the stomach within a minute of ingestion. Depending on whether you’ve eaten or not, the full effects of alcohol don’t kick in until later from the gastro-intestinal tract. Alcohol is especially fond of lipids, which is why a lot of it finds it way to the brain.  

	Studies on alcohol have linked its action to various neurotransmitters. In creating “beer goggles”, gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA) seems to be the most important especially as alcohol seems to have an affinity for its receptors. GABA is the primary inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain and alcohol facilitates its effects. Thus, alcohol generally depresses activity in the brain (Doweiko, 2002). 

Recent studies have identified and linked the δ-containing subtype of the GABAAR receptor with sensitivity to low doses of alcohol (Olsen et al., 2010). While these only account for 5-10 percent of all GABA receptors, they play an important role in regulating neuronal activity and activities in local circuitry. These circuits seem to be most numerous in the prefrontal cortex, the cerebellum, and the hippocampus. Consequently, this suggests that these parts are the first to be affected by alcohol.   

Another relevant neurotransmitter would be dopamine: which seems to act by mediating sexual desire. However, dopamine not only mediates increased sex drive, it also mediates expectancies or expectations of rewarding experiences. Alcohol’s effects seem to be caused, in part, by its drinker’s expectations, much like a placebo. This makes it difficult to decouple what parts of an effect is actually caused by alcohol, and what parts are contributed by expectancies. However, alcohol does seem to have an effect on sexual desire independent of expectancies (Lyvers et al., 2009). 

Alcohol plays this part by interfering with dopamine reuptake, a process that forces neurons to empty their stores of dopamine and swamp the synaptic junction. It also mediates the release of more dopamine. However, dopamine release is correlated with alcohol levels in the blood but peaks at moderate doses and no longer increases at higher levels.

The initially excitatory effect of alcohol, and the locations of the GABAAR δ point us to the prefrontal cortex (PFC) – particularly the dorsolateral (DLPFC) and ventromedial (VMPFC) areas. The DLPFC has been linked with evaluation of external stimuli, executive functioning, and self-control while the VMPFC area acts as a mediating mechanism by integrating somatosensory feedback that influence decision-making, including responses to attractive faces (Forgas et al., 2009). When these two structures are inhibited by alcohol, the result would be one of the characteristic effects of “beer goggles”: a tendency to rate people higher in attractiveness than one normally would. 

Summing it up, “beer goggles” is an interesting phenomenon. Our senses and executive functions can desert even with just a glass of wine. The bar is a potentially rewarding place for social interactions, but a lot of risk also happens to tag along with the alcohol. 


A single red rose. His heart skips a beat as it makes its way toward the center of his universe. He holds his breath as he brings the flower closer and closer. 
	He looks around to check if the room is empty. Finally, he walks toward the table at the center of the room, places the red flower on top it, along with a simple note in neat handwriting that read: “For Ms. Risa Pontavedra. Signed in Secret” He takes a step back, turns around, then leaves before the morning class arrives. 

	In theory, a morning Chemistry class in the summer is quiet. In practice, the morning laboratory class under Ma’am Tan is one of the liveliest you could find. It isn’t because her students loved Chemistry; most claimed that they detested it. Students coming from their time in lecture class, mostly spent between being drowsy and sleeping outright, are suddenly free to talk to each other and make noise. Ma’am Tan has been known to remark that it’s like releasing children into a playground.
	Francis is taking this summer class because he doesn’t want to juggle Chemistry and Math during a regular semester. His classmates have different reasons: some are shifting to a different course next semester, others delayed and catching up with their units, others still wanting to take an advantage of the fact that Chemistry is easier during the summer.
	It’s an average Chemistry laboratory, with three cold black plastic tables with faucets and knobs for water and gas running the length of the room. The room is flooded by light from the large windows. Old cabinets and shelves occupy the corners; they contain empty bottles that once contained different chemicals. 
	 He sweeps aside the few strands of hair covering his forehead as he reads a book while sitting on top of one of the laboratory table, technically discouraged but done anyway. He’s rather oblivious to the other people in the room as he sways his feet back and forth against the lockers under the tables. Sweat has been forming on his brow. From time to time, his deep eyes sneak glances at the red rose on the other side of the room, whose receiver is no secret but whose sender is a mystery to all but a few people inside the room.
	“Hello Francis! How was your date with Molecular Bonding last night?” It is Aida, his best friend and current lab partner. This takes him out of his nervous trance. 
	Francis laughs and answers. “Horrible, it hates me.” Francis’ rather nervous face changes instantly. 
	“Oh I’m sure you’ll grow into it.” Aida’s voice then changes into a mischievous whisper, “Especially if you give it a rose or something?”
	“Shhh. Don’t be so light-hearted about it, I’m nervous enough as it is.” 
	“Don’t get yourself too worked up about it. Speaking of which, I think it’s showtime” 
	A group of students enter the room. There are three girls and two boys. One girl has shoulder length brownish hair tied in a neat ponytail and bright brown eyes. She is rather short compared to her two companions and has a row of braces on her upper teeth. Her name is Charisa Dolores A. Pontavedra, simply known as Risa. 
	Already, Francis hears sounds ranging from hushed whisper to outright squealing. He hears Aida’s cooing, some cheering, and finally, the squeals of Risa’s companions. Risa, however, is scanning the room. True, she is laughing, but he can tell that she’s also thinking, her lips are pursing and her cheeks shifting left to right. 
	Having done his share of making noise, he puts aside his book, opens his notebook, and reads. 
	“A catalyst is a chemical substance that increases or decreases the rate of chemical reaction.” 
Experiment 6: Oxidation Reduction
	An oxidation reduction is the transfer of electrons from a reducing agent willing to give electrons to an oxidizing agent willing to receive them. 
	“Well that’s a nice way to put it.”
	Francis is contemplating the subject of oxidation reduction. As he enters the small room known as their lecture classroom, Francis’ musings on the subject is suddenly interrupted. 
	 “Is that wax on your hair?” Aida’s question sounds like a statement. 
	 “Yes, it was a hard and expensive decision, but yes.” Francis answers. 
	“I don’t know whether to tease you or to applaud you but your hair and your clothes look great!” Aida said with amusement. 
	“Is that what you think?” 
	“Yes! Although I worry that you’re taking this little crush of yours a little too far.” 
	“Maybe, maybe not. I don’t know. I’ve told you I’ve never done this before.” 
	“What have you never done before?” Risa’s voice suddenly asks from behind, her bright eyes betraying curiosity. 
	“Oxidation-reduction.” A startled Francis tries to deliver the clumsy answer with as straight a face as possible until he breaks into laughter. “Speaking of which, have you found out who sent you that rose?”
	“No, but I swear I’m going to find out.” 
	Francis and Aida laugh at her answer. 
	“Did you like it?” Aida asks playfully. 
	“I won’t react … until I find out who sent it.” 
	Everyone laughs again. 
	“By the way, nice hair” Risa says with a smile before moving on to her seat at the back of the lecture classroom. 
	“Thanks.” Francis barely suppresses a squeal of delight. 
Experiment 8: Flame Test
	“You’re studying? On a weekend?” Aida couldn’t believe Francis. Her normally lazy but smart friend was studying for a subject that he had no passion for. 
	“Yes I am. I figured that if anything is going to happen, I better do something to earn it.” 
	“Are you doing this because you want a higher grade? Or are you doing this because of ‘her?’ Because I can’t believe you just said that without a hint of joking.”
	Aida’s receiver is met with silence. Francis isn’t answering the question, not over the phone anyway. 
	“And how do you find time to study, between buying roses, lace, stationery and planning your little demonstrations of ‘love’?” 
	“I have ways.” Francis answers giddily. “If you don’t mind I must finish reading about molecular models now. She’s going to go online anytime soon and I have a few questions for her that need answering.” With a laugh, Francis puts down the phone. 
	It’s in moments like these that Aida asks herself why she even bothers with friends. 

	The next Monday, Aida enters the laboratory to find a brown folder lying on Risa’s table. She has no doubts as to who it came from and approaches Francis. 
	“What are you doing this time?” She asks in a curious tone
	“It’s a surprise.” Francis answers with a laugh. 
	With an entire class full of people curious as to what was in the folder, it isn’t a surprise that Risa’s arrival was met with a chorus of coos, squeals and cheers. All eyes are on the folder except for Francis’ whose eyes are on Risa pensive face. 
	One. Two. Three. Risa opens the folder to reveal twelve butterflies arranged in three neat rows. 
	Four. Five. Six. The butterflies begin to stir, one by one. It doesn’t take long before each one is flying around an amazed group of Chemistry students. Twelve colorful butterflies in a chemistry laboratory. 
	Aida looks at Risa’s brown eyes that are alight with surprise and the hints of a smile coming from her lips. She then looks down at a piece of paper left on the folder. 
Dear Risa.
 I hope you liked the rose the first time around. I hope that it made you smile for a while. It’s my way of telling you how much I admire you. I’m sorry if I still too afraid to tell you myself but I do hope that you like these butterflies I’m sending you. I never thought I’d be doing this in Chemistry. Let’s just say that things can bloom in the most unlikely places.” 
	Ma’am Tan arrives not long afterward, leaving an entire class to disperse to their respective tables. 
	Aida, in a whisper, asks Francis. “Suppose this all works out. Suppose she isn’t turned off. What happens afterwards?”
	All Francis can manage was an “I don’t know”. He has that carefree smile on his face. 
	“This can’t go on forever. You have to do something else sometime.” 
Experiment 10: Qualitative Analysis  
	The morning of the big day comes. Everything is prepared: a letter to be read, a flower to be given, a song to be sung. Everything he’s done to be summed up in one act. Aida says go for it, but his other friends say it’s risky. He, however, is determined to see it done. 
	Francis’ lecture classroom is an average-sized room painted in a light green shade. Aside from the old wooden door and an antique periodic table at the front of the class, the room appears totally new. The drab plastic chairs are a big contrast to the old wooden chairs found in most of the building’s rooms. 
	The morning class is normally uneventful, a perfect time to do something unexpected and unpredictable. True to their routines, every student arrives at more or less the same time they arrive each day. The early birds, then Aida, then Francis, then the later birds, then Risa and her friends, then the latest birds, and, finally, the lecture instructor, all come in that order. 
	 Francis is sweating, sweating a lot. He is excited. His heart is beating rapidly. He can barely concentrate as molecular models, molecular bonds and other molecular God-only-knows-what go by. The clock is ticking, faster than he wants to. 
	Then comes that knock. Then two knocks, then a third. It’s his friend’s friends from the Music Club. The moment has arrived. A person with a guitar, one with a piece of paper, and another one with rose and a small blue envelope come in. 
	 No one has a doubt as to who it was for. No one is surprised when the words come in. 
	“We have a serenade for Ms. Risa Pontavedra, from a secret admirer.” 
	The applauses and the “oohs” and “yihees” follow almost spontaneously. Everyone is excited of course, but it is no surprise anymore. Risa was already coyly hiding her face, her bright eyes showing both interest and hesitation, and everyone else is suppressing a grin. 
	The person with the rose steps forward and places the rose at Risa’s seat. The person with the envelope blue envelope opens it and takes out a white card. He opens the card and reads it aloud. 
	“Dear Risa, I hope you don’t think one more song is excessive. Frankly, I believe it’s not enough to tell you how I feel. You already know that all I want is to see you smile, and I hope that my acts have done that. You make my days brighter and you give me a reason to do everything better. This might be the craziest act of my young life, but I think it worth it because it’s for you. If it’s too strong a word, then I’m sorry. However, I just want to tell you that I can’t help falling in love with you.”
	The class is initially speechless; a few brave souls manage to comment. In a few seconds, the song starts. The guitarist begins to play and the group begins to sing. 
	 “Wise men say only fools rush in …”
	For Francis, it’s comforting to hear. All his anxiety seems to melt a way. For him, it feels good to put his feelings in a song, one he spent hours choosing. While the entire lecture class is looking at the people singing his anonymous serenade, he is looking at the few who know and exchanging knowing glances. Aida is smiling at him while his other friends in are class also giving him looks and gestures of approval. At that moment, he believes he has done right. 
	“ … ‘cause I can’t help falling in love with you.” The song ends and the entire classroom is full of applause. Even the lecture instructor, a middle aged lady, was smiling. 
	Francis looks at Risa and sees her smile, but with little else showing any indication of what she’s thinking. The serenade ends, a rose left in front of Risa, and the group leaves. The rest of the class goes on uneventfully. 
	“So what happens next?” The thought is coming back to Francis. 
	“Aida, what should I do next?” Francis whispers on the way to laboratory class. 
	“It’s up to you, you’ve gone this far. What do you want to do?” 
	“I .. I want to tell her. I can’t go on doing this, it’s crazy.”
	“And telling her is even crazier. Are you out of your mind? You’ll scare her.” Aida lowers her voice even more. 
	“Then what do I do? Do another one? Time isn’t exactly on my side.” 
	“ … I … I don’t know. But whatever you do, it’s too early to tell her. That’s going a little too far, a little too fast.” 
	“I’ll guess I’ll be the one to decide then.” Francis says in a tone of resignation. 
	“Don’t …” Aida tries to speak but realizes Francis isn’t listening anymore. “My goodness …” 
	Francis avoids Aida for most of the lab class. He could see Aida is frustrated at what she thinks is an impulsive decision. At the end of the class, Aida approaches Francis once more.
	“I know I can’t stop you but I want to tell you that you won’t be able to walk away from what you’re about to do. Just reconsider, please.” Aida says in a serious tone. 
	“Alright, thanks. But I’ve already made up my mind.” 
	“I’ll see you at the usual place later, then?” Aida doesn’t wait for the answer. 
	Francis waits for a few minutes. He shuffles and rearranges the stuff in his bag a few times. He fixes his shoes and practices the scene in his head. When only a few people are left, Francis musters all the courage he can find and approaches Risa. 
	“Hi Risa, do we have any assignments for tomorrow?” He tries to speak as calmly as possible. 
	“None that I know of,” Risa answers with a slight laugh.
	“Oh alright … thanks.” 
	“Sure. No problem. Hmm. Do you need anything else?” 
	“Not really.” Francis laughs. “Where did you put your rose?” Francis jokes.
	Risa laughs. “I placed it over there; whoever is sending these things is quite persistent. If only I knew who he … or she is.” They both laugh at the last part. “Oh yeah, Francis … when’s the next study group session?” 
	“This Friday, I think, although we haven’t decided on a place yet.”  
	“Oh okay, that’s alright. 
	“Listen, I .. um … I have one last thing.” Francis tries to laugh, but his tone is changing. 
	“Sure, what?” Risa is still smiling. 
	Francis is unsure, he’s hasn’t really thought about this. “I … want to tell you that … I know who’s been doing all this.” 
	“You know who did all of this?” Risa asks, her face has become more serious.” 
	“Yes, he’s standing before you now. I really feel … what’s the matter?” Francis already feels what little confidence he has left deserting him.  
	Risa answers with silence, a cold uncomfortable one. Francis tries to go on, but there is no more response, only a silence of rejection. He tries to continue, but he knows it already a lost cause, she’s in shock, as though she has been expecting someone else. Her eyes are dull and clearly avoiding him. 
	The question is answered. “What now?” 
	The answer appears to be “Nothing.”  
Experiment 15: Shifting Equilibrium 
	“She doesn’t want to talk to me.” That is what Francis kept telling Aida. 
	Francis is conflicted. Aida knows that is precisely what’s happening. Part of him has been driven into panic; the other part is hardening into resolve. After every class, Francis musters enough courage to approach Risa, but Aida has seen every attempt fail. 
	Francis still goes to class with waxed hair, a kempt face, and a smile. He seems determined to keep trying. Publicly, he still exudes energy, making noise in class, mingling with everyone. Privately, however, he is more reserved now. He spends a lot of time in thought. In fact, he seems to be studying all the time. 
	“Are you alright? You haven’t been yourself lately.” Aida strikes a conversation. 
	“Well, I’m trying to talk to her but I can’t. She won’t” 
	Aida motioned Francis to go on, she doesn’t want to talk. She knows her friend needs someone who would listen. 
	“I’m torn between letting go, and fighting on. I’m not really sure. Why am I so confused, Aida? 
	Aida decides to talk. “You’ve done a lot. The things you did for her were sweet. And that she won’t talk to you isn’t your fault. You shouldn’t be so hard on yourself.” 
	“Thanks, but I still don’t know what to do. If only I could change things.” 
	“It’s not what you could’ve done but what you can do right now. Do what you can, and the rest is up to her.” Aida could feel Francis’ confusion. 
	“Thanks Aida. I just feel that I need to finish this. What do you think?”
	“I’m not going to stop you. After all, you never listen to me anyway.” They both laugh. 
	“But whatever you’re going to do, good luck” Aida says with a smile. 
	Aida could see Francis smile. It would be a long way, but she thinks things are about to return to normal. Things are, after all, about to end.  
	Experiment 16: Special Properties. 
	The last day of chemistry is the last day he would have to see her. The last day of Chemistry is his last chance to let go. For Francis, it is also for planning. He doesn’t think of Risa that often anymore, but it is clear that it would take some time to forget. 
	He has planned a last act, one final gesture to thank her or to say goodbye to her. For the rest of the class, he would remain a mystery, a secret admirer. To Risa, he probably would be just some other suitor. To those who know what he did, he is someone who made sweet gestures out of admiration for someone. 
	He leaves a single lighted candle on the table along with a note. Aida wouldn’t be surprised, that was for sure, she knows something is going to happen. Francis thinks that this last act is needed. He doesn’t understand why but he simply can’t allow this day to pass without this happening. 
	Dear Risa, I would like to say I’m sorry and to tell you that I’m thankful. Please blow out the candle. Goodbye.
	It ends that day. The moment Risa enters the room, she moves quickly to the lighted candle. She reads the note, looks at Francis with an unreadable expression on her face, and silently blows out the candle. 
	Chemical properties. Colligative properties. They surface with the reaction and mixing of substances. Substances have an effect on one other, some more important and significant. Sometimes the changes are big, sometimes they’re small. Sometimes, they are simple, sometimes drastic. Sometimes, they are temporary, sometimes permanent. It depends on how much of what has been mixed. 
	Francis begins to think again. Sometimes, the wrong properties surface and the wrong reactions just take place.

For me, success is a complicated word. I can’t define success singularly, and I insist on a definition with different dimensions. In terms of livelihood, it means having established a comfortable living without having worked for a multinational corporation or major company, and for doing something I love to do. In terms of dreams, it means leaving this world having accomplished something toward a more equitable and compassionate world. It also means having travelled around the world to a certain extent.  In terms of family, it means having raised at least one child and having given him, or her, a normal life full of extraordinary experiences. 


If there is anything that this exercise taught me, it is that I have been living a less than ideal life.  My stroke 6 years ago. altered a substantial part of my daily life. I have been spending my time, looking down at the ground, avoiding potholes and obstacles, instead of looking ahead at the people around me.
I also realized how often I failed to acknowledge the humanity of people around me. In doing this exercise,  I learned to look up again, appreciating the places around me when I walk and the people I meet on the street. Pepping myself to be aggressively posunity for good was acttually available around meitive during my morning walks took effort; but it felt great to consciously put on even a façade of positivity. 
Initially, I started with just Grab drivers and service industry workers: acknowledging their names, tipping generously, , and being less aloof than usual. One of the benefits I got from the exercise was not just that being kind felt good; it also encouraged one to do more good as well. Since Grab rides, and restaurant meals were infrequent for me, I found that the daily morning walks I took for exercise were more fertile ground for good opportunities to practice positivity. Since I often walked around the city center, my encounters were often with commuters on the way to somewhere else. Acknowledging them with a simple greeting each morning offered cheaper and more frequent opportunities fir positivity, at least in theory. 
As it turns out, people aren't so appreciative of this. I was often met with indifference, and sometimes I received suspicious looks.  On the first day I tried it, only four instances resulted in returned greetings: a security guard, a group of elderly ladies,  a street preacher, and an office worker I encountered on a crosswalk. 
The second day, a weekend resulted in a few more positive reactions when my greeting was returned ten times, mostly by older people. One group of younger people even mocked my efforts. 
Context mattered. Positivity is more likely to be noticed and acknowledged on a relaxed weekend in a park; than on a busy weekday in a well-trafficked city center.  

Finally, as a last variation, I tried alms-giving to beggars on the street and greeting them.  This proved more rewarding, as I don't think such people are used to being acknowledged and therefore had lower threshholds for joy, among other factors. In a way, positivity is indeed mind-broadening, in that I became more aware of how much opportunity for good lay around me, and it did help build my resources throughout the day, in that starting out with a positive attitude in the morning, even if I have to elicit it, provided its own reserve of energy that kept me going through the day. Positivity really does provide benefits; but mostly only if one backs it with kind acts toward other people. It can be effortful, but the effort doesn't have to be strenuous; merely mindful. 

When I followed up by doing some items of the List for reducing Negativity, I have generally had a few good weeks so far. It wasn't thart I didn't try to be nice or polite to others before (after all, being extremely polite is one the ways I cope with my physical handicap), it was just that my salutations or smiles were often automatic instead of conscious, mindful acts. This activity made me pay attention to my actions, and gave me a greater appreciation for them, especially when strangers are kind enough to smile back, letting me know I maade a difference to them. 
	For reducing negativity, I settled on a.) countering negative thing; and b.) avoiding rumination. These were a different kind of challenging. It wasn't that they required much new effort; it was that fighting negativity paradoxically made me focus on my  negative cognitions. To that end, much of my efforts to this end focused on mindfully monitoring my thoughts without actively telling myself to not engage in newgativity, hence avoiding the paradox. 
First, I was surprised by how much negative thinking I often ended up doing in the course of a day. Second, I wasted a lot of time on these thoughts so that actively fighting them freed up a lot of mental space for actually useful reflection. I catch myself every once in a while, ruminating on some pointless thing, and I just stop myself. I have also learned to avoid getting sucked into pointless arguments with strangers over the Internet that lead nowhere. 
Overall, I have found this activity to be beneficial to me. I have plans to continue doing some of these actions for some time over the semester just to continue harnessing the benefits of doing good. In addition, I feel like a better person, and am more proud of myself. It's relatively easy. I just had to pay attention, unlearn some habits, and start some new ones. 
I have found the world, and other people to be more interesting and worthy of special attention than I had previously thought. Sure, most people were not ready to receive or reciprocate positivity; but that only impressed on me that positivity requires one to be not just alert but also ready to seize opportunities for kindness. 
I reflect on  this exercise feeling that the world is a bigger and brighter place than I initially assumed. 
I not only feel better; I think better too.


In reflecting on The Good Life, I chose to focus on three ideas mentioned at the introduction to the class: the pleasant life, the engaged life. and the meaningful life. The most intuitive idea of the Good Life would be on of joy, and pleasure. After all, the Italians have the concept of La Dolce Vita (the Sweet Life) characterized by indulgence, and the easy-going, relaxed nature of Mediterranean cultures. This idea is intuitively appealing and I suppose a younger version of myself would have agreed that this was the Good Life. However, this was also the kind of life I had while recovering from my stroke for 4 years; and, as intuitive as it may be, it was never a life that really felt complete. 

Starting from my personal experience, the Pleasant Life is a necessary but not sufficient condition for The Good Life. For me, a truly Good life must incorporate elements of all three ideas. I.e it must be pleasant but incorporate engagement as a means to finding meaning WITHOUT sacrificing joy. A joyless; but meaningful life would be unsustainable. In reaching the conclusion that all three are important, I considered the implications of the absence of each in a life: a life devoid of pleasantness would be unbearable. a life without meaning would be aimless; and a life without engagement would be idle and boring. 
It appears self-evident that the good life would at least be based on positive emotions we associate with the pleasant life. However, many personal philosophies always take care to say that these are necessary thought not sufficient conditions for the good life. In other words, the pleasant life is a key part of the God Life; but it, alone, does not make up its entirety. A truly good life would need elements of engagement and meaning as well. 
Of course, notions of the Good Life are tied up with our notions of what makes a human person. It is only logical that how we view the human person shapes our view of the ideal life course one would take. It is therefore not surprising that notions of the good life tend to vary from individual to individual. 
For me, the Good Life is characterized, not by pleasure; but by striving. An idle life does not appeal to me. As much as I would wish for long0term rest when I am knee deep in work, my experience from stroke recovery has taught me that a stress-free life, while intuitively appealing, can be dull. Work, while we may often detest it, provides our lives meaning and purpose as demonstrated by reduced  perceptions of  well-being among the long-term unemployed.

In a sense, my experience in graduate school has given me a glimpse of this good life. Compared to the idleness of stroke recovery, I have had to work hard and conscientiously to keep up with course requirements. The tentative nature of knowledge also provides near infinite opportunities to strive for further enlightenment; and in a setting tolerant of mistakes and risk-taking. It might be possible to find these elsewhere but my current experience limits me to seeing only this scenario. 


Since I took Psych 207 in my first semester of MA as a review class, I have spent three straight semesters dealing with statistical methods. In Psych 207, I merely reviewed what I learned in undergrad from a new perspective. In Psych 210, I got deeper into hypothesis testing than I ever thought I would want, or was actually possible.  In Psych 212, we explored something new: the idea of controlling for the influence of other variables statistically rather than in experimental design. Of course, multivariate mthods have limitations when it comes to establishing causation; but the ability to manipulate and analyze a data set on my own provides me an opportunity to pursue questions I normally wouldn't think to pursue for logistical reasons. The beauty of data sets is that they can include a lot of variables that would be interesting to explore. When combined with statistical software which make asking novel questions and looking for answers to them as simple as clicking a button, data sets and multi-variate analysis apparently give me unprecedented freedom to be curious.  When the semester started, the first question we discussed was how life could be compared to multiple regression. A semester later, I believe I can stand by my answer: life is a complex reality where we have to account for many variables when we make decisions. In such a reality, we are more likely to achieve accuracy by controlling for multiple variables, as in a multiple regression analysis; than by relying on just one or two factors like in hypothesis testing. In multivariate analysis, I found an interesting range of possibilities in co relational studies, A method I had previously dismissed as imprecise or of no importance. 

Prior to this semester,  I had arrived at a conclusion that the process of making a research paper should firstinvolve doing related literature then moving to the methodology before undertaking the actual researrch work. Due to the nature of this particular research paper, I found that process had to be flexible because a data set can contain far from just one single insight. I found that it is always useful to have a plan for analysis; but that any plan will always need to adjust when interesting threads of data point to further insights elsewhere. At the same time, it was also useful to reorganize the related literature when it turned out that my literature said one thing while my data set said another. Lastly, I learned the beaty of using appropriate charts and tables For this paper, I learned as much from figuring how how to display the data in a chart as I did from looking at F-values in a table. Data visualization tended to be limited in the ANOVA; but it appears that it is doubly important when dealing with multiivariate analysis.





